[apm] Update APM feature roles docs (#4193)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/apm/feature-roles.asciidoc

Reviewer: I'm somewhat confused reading the page: is it about how clients write to APM Server or how APM Server writes to Elasticsearch? The navigation suggests the latter ("Secure communication with the Elastic Stack") but the enphasys on "users" (plural) makes me wonder (es "It’s recommended that you only grant users the minimum privileges", "Below are some common tasks that users in your organization might need to do").

If the page is about how APM Server writes to Elasticsearch I would replace mentions of "users" with "the APM Server user", so it's clear that is is a "machine user".

Author: How does this look c8fb50d5ae36acc0630b7509b28f3afb687b17c1 ?

Use role-based access control or API keys to grant APM Server users access to secured resources.

[discrete]
[[apm-secure-comms-stack-role-based]]
=== Role-based access

{es-security-features} provides {ref}/built-in-roles.html[built-in roles] that grant a
subset of the privileges needed by users.
When possible, assign users the built-in roles to minimize the affect of future changes on your security strategy.

If no built-in role is available, you can assign users the privileges needed to accomplish a specific task by
creating and assigning feature roles to users.

> <<apm-feature-roles,*Read more in Use feature roles →*>>

Author: Does this framing make sense?

Reviewer: It does to me. I'm confused about how to use built-in roles though. We provide
`apm_system` and `apm_user` but I was not able to understand which permissions those would apply and if they were relevant compared to what is written under Use feature roles. I'll do a bit of research there.

Author: >Elasticsearch security features provides [built-in roles](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.15/built-in-roles.html) that grant a subset of the privileges needed by APM users. When possible, assign users the built-in roles to minimize the affect of future changes on your security strategy.

This is in the [current docs](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/apm-secure-comms-stack.html#apm-feature-roles), but if this is no longer relevant we can remove that idea in this PR &mdash; just let me know!

Reviewer: Yes, I would remove it. I checked with the team also and those roles are not relevant for the APM Server use cases.

Author: ```suggestion
[discrete]
[[apm-secure-comms-stack-role-based]]
=== Role-based access

Manage access on a feature-by-feature basis by creating several custom feature-related roles and assigning
one or more of these roles to each APM Server user based on which features they need to access.

<<apm-feature-roles,*Read more in Use feature roles →*>>
```

[[apm-feature-roles]]
=== Create and assign feature roles to users

++++
<titleabbrev>Use feature roles</titleabbrev>
++++

It's recommended that you only grant users the minimum privileges required to use specific features. One approach to managing access on a feature-by-feature basis is to create several feature-related _roles_ and assign one or more of these roles to each _user or group_ based on which features the user needs to access.

[TIP]
====
A _role_ identifies a set of permissions that translate to privileges on resources. You can associate a _user or group_ with an arbitrary number of roles. The total set of permissions that a user has is defined by the union of the permissions in all its roles.
====

Below are some common tasks that users in your organization might need to do and links to more information on creating roles that provides access to the right resources:

* <<apm-privileges-agent-central-config,*Central configuration management role*>>:
Allows a user to view APM Agent central configurations, which is *required* when
<<apm-agent-configuration,central configuration management>> is enabled (it is enabled by default).

> * <<apm-privileges-to-publish-events,*Writer role*>>:

Reviewer 2: The writer role is actually the most important role, which allows apm-server to write to ES (although users may configure apm-server to write to something else e.g. logstash). I wonder if we should move it to the top and mark it as required as well.

Allows a user to publish events collected by APM Server.
* <<apm-privileges-to-publish-monitoring,*Monitoring role*>>: Allows a user to publish monitoring data,
view monitoring data, or both.

> * <<apm-privileges-api-key,*API key role*>>: Allow a user to create and manage API keys.

Reviewer 2: This is deprecated

Author: Do you know in which version it was deprecated?

Author: Closing the loop via https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/4193#issuecomment-2363155509: 

>deprecated since 8.6.0

* <<apm-privileges-rum-source-mapping,*RUM source mapping role*>>: Allows a user to read RUM source maps.

> // Is "deployment" the right word?

Reviewer 2: Probably not the most accurate word. Also, I'd just say that if a user uses agent central configuration to manage APM agents, as well as using RUM source mapping, then they need to assign 3 roles to apm-server.

Allows a user to publish events collected by APM Server, which is *required* to write to {es}.
* <<apm-privileges-agent-central-config,*Central configuration management role*>>:
Allows a user to view APM Agent central configurations, which is *required* when
<<apm-agent-configuration,central configuration management>> is enabled (it is enabled by default).
* <<apm-privileges-to-publish-monitoring,*Monitoring role*>>: Allows a user to publish monitoring data,
view monitoring data, or both.
* <<apm-privileges-rum-source-mapping,*RUM source mapping role*>>: Allows a user to read RUM source maps.

// TO DO: Replace <do something> with a common task made possible by the listed roles
.Example: Assigning multiple roles to an APM Server user
*****
If you use agent central configuration to manage APM agents, you use RUM source mapping,
and you want to create an APM Server user who can <do something>,
you would need to assign these three roles to the user:

* <<apm-privileges-to-publish-events,Writer role>>
* <<apm-privileges-agent-central-config,Central configuration management role>>
* <<apm-privileges-to-publish-events,RUM source mapping role>>

> *****

Author: What is an example of a task that an APM Server user with these roles might need to complete? Feel free to suggest a different set of roles as an example if this one doesn't make sense.

Author: How does this look?

```suggestion
.Example: Assigning multiple roles to an APM Server user
*****
If you want to create an APM Server user who can use the Elastic APM Real User Monitoring (RUM)
JavaScript Agent to ingest data from a frontend application and you use central configuration
to manage APM agents, you would need to assign these three roles to the user:

* <<apm-privileges-to-publish-events,Writer role>>
* <<apm-privileges-agent-central-config,Central configuration management role>>
* <<apm-privileges-to-publish-events,RUM source mapping role>>
*****
```

Reviewer: Looks good :+1: ! Just one small detail, on line 94 I see `<<apm-privileges-to-publish-events,RUM source mapping role>>`, is `apm-privileges-to-publish-events` the correct link path?

Author: Good catch!

////
***********************************  ***********************************
***********************************  ***********************************
////

[float]
[[apm-privileges-to-publish-events]]
=== Create a _writer_ role

APM users that publish events to {es} _must_ have privileges to write to APM data streams.

// Not sure if I captured this accurately...
[NOTE]
====
This is not needed when APM Server doesn't write to {es} directly.
For example, in some cases you may configure APM Server to write to another
output like Logstash, Kafka, or any another output supported by libbeat.
In these cases, another configured {es} role will need to be passed to
<<apm-agent-config-elasticsearch,`apm-server.agent.config.elasticsearch`>>.

> ====

Author: From @endorama:

>Documentation for `output.elasticsearch`, which `apm-server.agent.config.elasticsearch` link to, does not mention roles at all, so I think this ends up being too confusing.

My question:

>@endorama @carsonip can you be more specific about what should be changed about the note as it exists in the [latest commit]?

Reviewer: I would update it as follow:
```suggestion
// Not sure if I captured this accurately...
[NOTE]
====
This is not needed when APM Server doesn't write to {es} directly.
For example, in some cases you may configure APM Server to write to another
output like Logstash, Kafka, or any another output supported by libbeat.
In these cases, different authentication credentials will need to be passed to
<<apm-agent-config-elasticsearch,`apm-server.agent.config.elasticsearch`>>.
====
```

The idea is that you don't pass a role to that configuration but either a username/password pair, an API key or TLS certificates. Removing the mention to roles I think removes the confusion.

***********************************  ***********************************
////

[float]
[[apm-privileges-to-publish-events]]
=== Create a _writer_ role

APM users that publish events to {es} _must_ privileges to write to APM data streams.

// Not sure if I captured this accurately...
[NOTE]
====
This is not needed if APM Server doesn't write to {es} directly.
Instead, another configured {es} role will need to be passed to
<<apm-agent-config-elasticsearch,`apm-server.agent.config.elasticsearch`>>.

> ====

Reviewer: This doesn't sound right to me, but I may be missing some use case. I have 2 points:
1. APM Server would always write to ES directly :thinking: What use cases would not see APM Server using the Elasticsearch output but not writing directly to Elasticsearch?
2. Documentation for `output.elasticsearch`, which `apm-server.agent.config.elasticsearch` link to, does not mention roles at all, so I think this ends up being too confusing.

Can we clarify (1)? I think (2) will be more easy to explain after clarifying that.

Reviewer 2: > APM Server would always write to ES directly

APM server can be configured to write to logstash, kafka etc, all the outputs supported by libbeat.

Author: I attempted to add more context related to (1) in 571a58ca34b28e8339ba532ebc45fbd57d2ceb97, but it's not clear to me what needs to be done related to (2). @endorama @carsonip can you be more specific about what should be changed about the note as it exists in 571a58ca34b28e8339ba532ebc45fbd57d2ceb97?

assign the user the following privileges:

[options="header"]
|====
|Type | Privilege | Purpose

| Index
|`read` on `.apm-agent-configuration` index, `allow_restricted_indices: true`
|Allow APM Server to manage central configurations in {es}
|====

The above privileges should be sufficient for APM agent central configuration to work properly
as long as APM Server communicates with {es} successfully.
If it fails, it may fallback to read agent central configuration via {kib} if configured,
which requires the following privileges:

[options="header"]
|====
|Type | Privilege | Purpose

| Spaces
|`Read` on APM UI
|Allow APM Server to manage central configurations via the APM UI
|====

TIP: Looking for privileges and roles needed to use central configuration from the APM UI or APM UI API?
See <<apm-app-central-config-user,APM UI central configuration user>>.

////
***********************************  ***********************************
***********************************  ***********************************
////

[float]
[[apm-privileges-to-publish-events]]
=== Create a _writer_ role

> APM users that publish events to {es} need privileges to write to APM data streams.

Reviewer 2: Add a note that this is not needed if apm-server doesn't write to ES directly, although that is _very_ rare. Also, in those cases, the other configured ES roles will need to be passed in another section e.g. `apm-server.agent.config.elasticsearch` instead of `output.elasticsearch`.

Author: Moving all related discussion to https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/4193#discussion_r1747383918.

|Index
|`create_doc` on `traces-apm*`, `logs-apm*`, and `metrics-apm*` indices
|Write events into {es}

|Cluster
|`monitor`
a|* Allows cluster UUID checks, which are performed as part of APM server startup preconditions
if {ref}/security-settings.html[Elasticsearch security] is enabled (it is enabled by default).
* Allows a license check, which is required if <<apm-tail-based-sampling,tail-based sampling>> is enabled.

NOTE: If you have explicitly disabled Elastic security _and_ you are _not_ using tail-based sampling,

> this privilege may not be necessary.

Author: This row is new and needs review.

Reviewer: This looks correct to me.

////
***********************************  ***********************************
***********************************  ***********************************
////

[float]
[[apm-privileges-agent-central-config]]
=== Create a _central config_ role

[[apm-central-config-role-note]]
[IMPORTANT]
====
The privileges included in this role are *required* for all users when <<apm-agent-configuration,central configuration management>> is enabled (it is enabled by default). You do _not_ need the _Central configuration management_ role only if central configuration management has been explicitly disabled in the APM UI.
====

[[apm-privileges-agent-central-config-server]]
APM Server acts as a proxy between your APM agents and the APM UI.
The APM UI communicates any changed settings to APM Server so that your agents only need to poll the Server
to determine which central configuration settings have changed.

To grant an APM Server user with the required privileges for managing central configuration in {es} without {kib},
assign the user the following privileges:

[options="header"]
|====
|Type | Privilege | Purpose

| Index
|`read` on `.apm-agent-configuration` index, `allow_restricted_indices: true`

> |Allow APM Server to manage central configurations in {es}

Author: @endorama to confirm what @carsonip said in https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/4193#issuecomment-2374558159. Let me know if this needs to change or if we need to provide more information about how to configure this.

Reviewer: Permissions are correct, but we need to mention that this cannot be achieved with the UI. Linking to https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/apm-beats-api-keys.html would provide the appropriate additional information. Incidentally there is an open PR related to that page, as currently does not show the correct information https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/4083

Author: I understand that we can't configure this role in the UI, but I'm confused about why we would point to the [Grant access using API keys](https://observability-docs_bk_4083.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/observability/master/apm-beats-api-keys.html) page. Unless I'm misunderstanding, _Grant access using API keys_ describes an _alternative_ to creating roles, not how to use an API to create/update roles. Is that correct? Are we saying that the user shouldn't use a role to give an APM Server user this kind of access? Or do we want to instruct the user to use an API ([Create or update roles API](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-api-put-role.html)?) to create the _central config_ role?

Author: Would something like this be appropriate? 

>To create a role with the required privileges for managing central configuration in Elasticsearch without Kibana, you must to use the [Roles API](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-api-put-role.html) (the required privileges can't be assigned to a role in Kibana):
>
> ```
>POST /_security/role/apm_agentcfg
>{
>  "description": "Allow APM Server to manage central configurations in Elasticsearch.",
>  "indices": [
>    {
>      "names": [".apm-agent-configuration"],
>      "privileges": ["read"],
>      "allow_restricted_indices": true
>    }
>  ]
>}
>```

Reviewer: > I understand that we can't configure this role in the UI, but I'm confused about why we would point to the [Grant access using API keys](https://observability-docs_bk_4193.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/observability/master/apm-beats-api-keys.html) page. Unless I'm misunderstanding, Grant access using API keys describes an alternative to creating roles, not how to use an API to create/update roles. 

Yes this is correct and yes also to your confusion! 

I think your proposal to use the Roles API is better in this context! I haven't tested it yet but looking at the permissions we grant to the API key and the Roles API docs everything seems correct. I'll test it tomorrow.

Reviewer: tested and it's working correctly! The user with that role assigned was correctly able to read the APM agent configurations, while removing the role produced an error. :sparkles:

> |====

Reviewer 2: @endorama to confirm the required privileges to query cluster uuid.

|====
+
. Assign the *monitoring role* to users who need to write monitoring data to {es}.
. Assign <<apm-feature-roles,additional APM feature roles>> to users as needed

> (including the _Central configuration management role_, which is <<apm-central-config-role-note,required in most cases>>).

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, most of the time it needs apm_writer as well. I wonder if we could capture that without cluttering this note.

|`monitoring_user`
|Grants access to monitoring indices for APM Server
|====
. Assign <<apm-feature-roles,additional APM feature roles>> to users as needed
(including the _Central configuration management role_, which is <<apm-central-config-role-note,required in most cases>>).

////
***********************************  ***********************************
***********************************  ***********************************
////

[float]
[[apm-privileges-api-key]]

> === Create an _API key_ role

Reviewer 2: @endorama to confirm if this should be mark as deprecated

Reviewer: Yes, it should be. Full context in  https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/4193#issuecomment-2363155509
